README.md, before:

jahia-scriptrunner
==================

A small command-line utility to perform database or other modifications without launching Jahia.

Why this tool ?
---------------

The goal of this tool is to be able to fix "chicken and egg" problems that may be encountered on
Jahia environment that are no longer accessible through normal Jahia startup. Such problems may
include :
- an incomplete namespace registry (possibly due to some invalid deployments, no longer possible
with recent version of Jackrabbit or Jahia)
- problems with database blobs than cannot be corrected through simple SQL queries
- other database issues such as tables that were not properly purged after a re-install because DROP TABLE permissions
were not given to the database user

This tool is really good for all the problems that may involve serialized Java classes stored in
BLOBs since in theory it can load and modify these blobs using custom scripts. Since it uses a
class loader that gives you access to all the Jahia libraries and classes from the installed
product, the possibilities are endless as to what you may do (start a part of the system, re-use
model classes, etc...). It can also be used to easily execute SQL statements against the database
using the configuration already setup in the Jahia server installation.

How it works
------------

The utility will first try to locate the Jahia installation using the specified directory or using
the current directory, it will setup a classloader with all the jars from WEB-INF/lib and WEB-INF/classes
from the Jahia installation.

From this classloader it will load the main core of the utility that will then load the database
configuration from the META-INF/context.xml file (so for the moment only Tomcat installations are
supported) and create a connection to the database. It is also possible to configure the connection to
the database using a properties file (see the Alternate database configuration section below).

Once all this is done it will then load and execute the Groovy script specified on the command line,
passing it the following bound variables :

    jdbcConnection - a java.sql.Connection class that contains the active connection to the database. IMPORTANT:
    The JDBC connection autocommit is NOT activated, remember to always use commits to make sure the modifications
    are properly sent to the database. This is done because PostgreSQL requires non-autocommit connections to work
    with BLOBs.

    scriptRunnerConfiguration - a instance of the ScriptRunnerConfiguration class that contains all the configuration
    of the current script runner instance

    classLoader - the ClassLoader used to load all the Jahia JARs and classes

    scriptOptions - a Properties object with all the options passed on the command line using the -X
    parameter

How to use it
-------------

Command line format:

    usage: jahia-scriptrunner [options] script_to_launch
     -d,--installationDirectory <dir>     Jahia installation directory
     -h,--help                            Prints this help screen
     -l,--listScripts                     Outputs the list of built-in
                                          available scripts for this Jahia
                                          version
     -v,--jahiaVersion <version>          Overrides the automatic Jahia
                                          version detection and specify a
                                          version using this command line
                                          option
     -x,--scriptOptions <scriptOptions>   A comma separated list of key=value
                                          options to pass to the script

Here a sample command line we will describe :

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-7.0.23/webapps/ROOT -x dumpXml=true dumpJCRFileSystem.groovy

The "-d" option allows you to specify in which directory it must look for all the librairies, classes and
 database configuration to load. The "-x" options allows to specify a comma separated list of key=value
 pairs that will be passed to the script as a Properties object and that may be used to modify the
 behavior of the script. The third main argument is the Groovy script to launch within the
 context of the setup classloader. The given script will dump the contents of the jr_fsg_fsentry table,
 a Jackrabbit table that contains BLOBs which themselves are file contents such as the serialized
 namespace mapping and indexes, or the custom nodetypes XML descriptor. The -x dumpXML=true flag is used
 to specify that we want to dump the XML file, by default XML files are not dumped.

Alternate database configuration
--------------------------------

By default the tool will try to retrieve the database configuration from Jahia's META-INF/context.xml, but in some
cases this might not work because either the file was not configured or it is not available. To handle cases like these,
it is possible to provide a database configuration file called databaseConfiguration.properties that needs to be in the
same directory as the jahia-scriptrunner and that must have content that looks like this :

    driverClassName=com.mysql.jdbc.Driver
    connectionURL=jdbc:mysql://localhost/jahia-6.6?useUnicode=true&characterEncoding=UTF-8&useServerPrepStmts=false
    userName=jahia
    password=jahia
    schema=mysql

The schema is the name of the databaseType that is configured in the WEB-INF/etc/repository/jackrabbit/repository.xml
in the following section:

      <DataSources>
        <DataSource name="jahiaDS">
          <param name="driver" value="javax.naming.InitialContext" />
          <param name="url" value="java:comp/env/jdbc/jahia" />
          <param name="databaseType" value="mysql" />
        </DataSource>
      </DataSources>

Also, if you need to provide another database driver version or JAR, you will need to modify the shell scripts to add
a classpath JVM option to point to your database driver JAR.

Here is an example of using the tool with a custom driver JAR :

    java -classpath mysql-connector-java-5.1.26.jar:target/jahia-scriptrunner-1.0-SNAPSHOT-with-deps.jar org.jahia.server.tools.scriptrunner.ScriptRunner -x scriptFile=/Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-7.0.23/webapps/ROOT/WEB-INF/var/db/sql/schema/mysql/jackrabbit-schema.sql -d /Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-7.0.23/webapps/ROOT sqlExecute.groovy

For practical reasons you might want to copy the jahia-scriptrunner.sh/.bat script and add your driver JARs to the
classpath.

Examples
--------

### Dump the JCR database file system

The following example will dump the contents of the database file system configured for the JCR repository:

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-7.0.23/webapps/ROOT -x dumpXml=true dumpJCRFileSystem.groovy

### Updating JCR namespace blobs

In this example we add the specified prefix and namespace uri to the DB file system namespace registry
file ns_reg.properties and ns_idx.properties

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Applications/Ent-Jahia_xCM_v6.6.0.0/tomcat/webapps/ROOT/ -x namespaceOperation=add,namespace=scriptTest:http://www.jahia.com/script-test updateJCRNamespaces.groovy


### Checking JCR language integrity

The following example will check the JCR to make sure that all mix:language nodes have a property named jcr:language

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Applications/Ent-Jahia_xCM_v6.6.0.0/tomcat/webapps/ROOT/ checkJCRLanguageIntegrity.groovy

### Execute an SQL query/update statement or an SQL script file

In the following example we show an example of how to execute an SQL query on the database configured in Jahia.

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Users/loom/java/packages/Ent-Jahia_xCM_v6.6.1.6/tomcat/webapps/ROOT/ -x statement="select * from jahia_contenthistory",csvOutput=test.csv,csvSeparatorChar=";" sqlExecute.groovy

If you prefer to use an SQL script file to execute many statements at once, you can do so by using the scriptFile
script parameter as in the following example :

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-6.0.20/webapps/ROOT -x scriptFile=/Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-6.0.20/webapps/ROOT/WEB-INF/var/db/sql/schema/mysql/jackrabbit-schema.sql sqlExecute.groovy

Be careful when using the script options to always put double-quotes around the statement and the separator char to make
sure it doesn't get interpreted wrong.

A script in detail
------------------

Here is the source code for the checkJCRLanguageIntegrity.groovy Groovy script, provided as an example of the power
offered by the tool. It uses a helper class called JackrabbitHelper that makes it easy to retrieve configuration and
persistence manager instances.

    package scripts

    import org.apache.jackrabbit.core.id.NodeId
    import org.apache.jackrabbit.core.persistence.IterablePersistenceManager
    import org.apache.jackrabbit.core.state.NodeState
    import org.jahia.server.tools.scriptrunner.engines.jahia66.JackrabbitHelper
    import org.slf4j.Logger
    import org.slf4j.LoggerFactory

    Logger logger = LoggerFactory.getLogger("checkJCRLanguageIntegrity.groovy");

    JackrabbitHelper jackrabbitHelper = new JackrabbitHelper(scriptRunnerConfiguration);

    logger.info("Checking default workspace bundles...");

    IterablePersistenceManager defaultPM = (IterablePersistenceManager) jackrabbitHelper.getWorkspacePM("default");
    checkLanguageIntegrity(defaultPM, jackrabbitHelper, logger);

    logger.info("Checking live workspace bundles...");
    IterablePersistenceManager livePM = (IterablePersistenceManager) jackrabbitHelper.getWorkspacePM("live");
    checkLanguageIntegrity(livePM, jackrabbitHelper, logger);

    logger.info("Checking versioning bundles...");
    IterablePersistenceManager versioningPM = (IterablePersistenceManager) jackrabbitHelper.getVersioningPM();
    checkLanguageIntegrity(versioningPM, jackrabbitHelper, logger);

    private void checkLanguageIntegrity(IterablePersistenceManager iterablePersistenceManager, JackrabbitHelper jackrabbitHelper, Logger logger) {
        Iterable<NodeId> allNodeIds = iterablePersistenceManager.getAllNodeIds(null, 0);
        Iterator<NodeId> allNodeIdIterator = allNodeIds.iterator();
        int count = 0;
        while (allNodeIdIterator.hasNext()) {
            NodeId nodeId = allNodeIdIterator.next();
            NodeState nodeState = iterablePersistenceManager.load(nodeId);
            if (jackrabbitHelper.isNodeType(nodeState, "http://www.jcp.org/jcr/mix/1.0", "language")) {
                if (!jackrabbitHelper.hasProperty(nodeState, "http://www.jcp.org/jcr/1.0", "language")) {
                    logger.warn("Node " + nodeState.getId() + " is of type mix:language but is missing a jcr:language property !");
                }
            }
            count++;
        }
        logger.info("Loaded " + count + " node states");
    }

Commit message:

Starting work on rewrite of README to illustrate the more generic way in which this tool now works so it is no longer specific to Jahia but can also be used with other Jackrabbit applications.

README.md, after:

jahia-scriptrunner
==================

A small command-line utility to perform database or other low-level modifications without launching Jahia or
other Jackrabbit-based application.

Why this tool ?
---------------

The goal of this tool is to be able to fix "chicken and egg" problems that may be encountered on
Jackrabbit environment that are no longer accessible through normal Jackrabbit startup. Such problems may
include :
- an incomplete namespace registry (possibly due to some invalid deployments, no longer possible
with recent version of Jackrabbit or Jahia)
- problems with database blobs than cannot be corrected through simple SQL queries
- other database issues such as tables that were not properly purged after a re-install because DROP TABLE permissions
were not given to the database user

This tool is really good for all the problems that may involve serialized Java classes stored in
BLOBs since in theory it can load and modify these blobs using custom scripts. Since it uses a
class loader that gives you access to all the Jahia libraries and classes from the installed
product, the possibilities are endless as to what you may do (start a part of the system, re-use
model classes, etc...). It can also be used to easily execute SQL statements against the database
using the configuration already setup in the Jahia server installation.

Features
--------

The Jahia Script Runner has a lot of built-in features, which may be expanded easily by writing scripts to use it
with:
* Full native integration with the configuration of Jahia servers, retrieve database connection and Jackrabbit
  configuration from the deployed installation.
* Compatibility with other Jackrabbit-based applications by using standard Jackrabbit configuration files
* Compatibility with other JDBC applications by being able to specify the database configuration in the
  configuration file
* Groovy scripting is supported out of the box, with the possibility to support any JSR-223 language simply by
  adding it in the tool's script class loader
* Scripts execute in a dynamically setup classloader that is setup using the tool's configuration, using either
  custom properties or automatically resolved from a Jahia deployed installation (in the case of non-Jahia applications,
  you may simply override the default class loader property to whatever you need)
* Built-in script to update Jackrabbit namespaces without starting the full repository, to correct any inconsistency
  that could exist between declared namespaces and JCR content. This works for all Jackrabbit file systems, including
  file systems that are stored in database blobs.
* Built-in script to dump the contents of the Jackrabbit file system, regardless of the FS implementation used.
* Built-in script to perform language integrity checks on JCR contents node inside of a Jackrabbit persistence manager
  without needed to start the whole repository system. This is very useful if there is a problem with the Lucene indexes
  preventing a full startup of the repository.
* Helper classes to provide a JDBC connection or Jackrabbit persistence manager instances to easily access these
  backends. You can use this to for example directly load node states from a Jackrabbit persistence manager and perform
  checks or even modify entries without starting the repository !
* Build your own scripts to do much more !

How it works
------------

The utility will first try to locate the Jahia installation using the specified directory or using
the current directory, it will setup a classloader with all the jars from WEB-INF/lib and WEB-INF/classes
from the Jahia installation.

From this classloader it will load the main core of the utility that will then load the database
configuration from the META-INF/context.xml file (so for the moment only Tomcat installations are
supported) and create a connection to the database. It is also possible to configure the connection to
the database using a properties file (see the Alternate database configuration section below).

Once all this is done it will then load and execute the Groovy script specified on the command line,
passing it the following bound variables :

    jdbcConnection - a java.sql.Connection class that contains the active connection to the database. IMPORTANT:
    The JDBC connection autocommit is NOT activated, remember to always use commits to make sure the modifications
    are properly sent to the database. This is done because PostgreSQL requires non-autocommit connections to work
    with BLOBs.

    scriptRunnerConfiguration - a instance of the ScriptRunnerConfiguration class that contains all the configuration
    of the current script runner instance

    classLoader - the ClassLoader used to load all the Jahia JARs and classes

    scriptOptions - a Properties object with all the options passed on the command line using the -X
    parameter

How to use it
-------------

Command line format:

    usage: jahia-scriptrunner [options] script_to_launch
     -d,--installationDirectory <dir>     Jahia installation directory
     -h,--help                            Prints this help screen
     -l,--listScripts                     Outputs the list of built-in
                                          available scripts for this Jahia
                                          version
     -v,--jahiaVersion <version>          Overrides the automatic Jahia
                                          version detection and specify a
                                          version using this command line
                                          option
     -x,--scriptOptions <scriptOptions>   A comma separated list of key=value
                                          options to pass to the script

Here a sample command line we will describe :

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-7.0.23/webapps/ROOT -x dumpXml=true dumpJCRFileSystem.groovy

The "-d" option allows you to specify in which directory it must look for all the librairies, classes and
 database configuration to load. The "-x" options allows to specify a comma separated list of key=value
 pairs that will be passed to the script as a Properties object and that may be used to modify the
 behavior of the script. The third main argument is the Groovy script to launch within the
 context of the setup classloader. The given script will dump the contents of the jr_fsg_fsentry table,
 a Jackrabbit table that contains BLOBs which themselves are file contents such as the serialized
 namespace mapping and indexes, or the custom nodetypes XML descriptor. The -x dumpXML=true flag is used
 to specify that we want to dump the XML file, by default XML files are not dumped.

Alternate database configuration
--------------------------------

By default the tool will try to retrieve the database configuration from Jahia's META-INF/context.xml, but in some
cases this might not work because either the file was not configured or it is not available. To handle cases like these,
it is possible to provide a database configuration file called databaseConfiguration.properties that needs to be in the
same directory as the jahia-scriptrunner and that must have content that looks like this :

    driverClassName=com.mysql.jdbc.Driver
    connectionURL=jdbc:mysql://localhost/jahia-6.6?useUnicode=true&characterEncoding=UTF-8&useServerPrepStmts=false
    userName=jahia
    password=jahia
    schema=mysql

The schema is the name of the databaseType that is configured in the WEB-INF/etc/repository/jackrabbit/repository.xml
in the following section:

      <DataSources>
        <DataSource name="jahiaDS">
          <param name="driver" value="javax.naming.InitialContext" />
          <param name="url" value="java:comp/env/jdbc/jahia" />
          <param name="databaseType" value="mysql" />
        </DataSource>
      </DataSources>

Also, if you need to provide another database driver version or JAR, you will need to modify the shell scripts to add
a classpath JVM option to point to your database driver JAR.

Here is an example of using the tool with a custom driver JAR :

    java -classpath mysql-connector-java-5.1.26.jar:target/jahia-scriptrunner-1.0-SNAPSHOT-with-deps.jar org.jahia.server.tools.scriptrunner.ScriptRunner -x scriptFile=/Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-7.0.23/webapps/ROOT/WEB-INF/var/db/sql/schema/mysql/jackrabbit-schema.sql -d /Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-7.0.23/webapps/ROOT sqlExecute.groovy

For practical reasons you might want to copy the jahia-scriptrunner.sh/.bat script and add your driver JARs to the
classpath.

Examples
--------

### Dump the JCR database file system

The following example will dump the contents of the database file system configured for the JCR repository:

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-7.0.23/webapps/ROOT -x dumpXml=true dumpJCRFileSystem.groovy

### Updating JCR namespace blobs

In this example we add the specified prefix and namespace uri to the DB file system namespace registry
file ns_reg.properties and ns_idx.properties

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Applications/Ent-Jahia_xCM_v6.6.0.0/tomcat/webapps/ROOT/ -x namespaceOperation=add,namespace=scriptTest:http://www.jahia.com/script-test updateJCRNamespaces.groovy


### Checking JCR language integrity

The following example will check the JCR to make sure that all mix:language nodes have a property named jcr:language

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Applications/Ent-Jahia_xCM_v6.6.0.0/tomcat/webapps/ROOT/ checkJCRLanguageIntegrity.groovy

### Execute an SQL query/update statement or an SQL script file

In the following example we show an example of how to execute an SQL query on the database configured in Jahia.

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Users/loom/java/packages/Ent-Jahia_xCM_v6.6.1.6/tomcat/webapps/ROOT/ -x statement="select * from jahia_contenthistory",csvOutput=test.csv,csvSeparatorChar=";" sqlExecute.groovy

If you prefer to use an SQL script file to execute many statements at once, you can do so by using the scriptFile
script parameter as in the following example :

    ./jahia-scriptrunner.sh -d /Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-6.0.20/webapps/ROOT -x scriptFile=/Users/loom/java/deployments/jahia-6.6/apache-tomcat-6.0.20/webapps/ROOT/WEB-INF/var/db/sql/schema/mysql/jackrabbit-schema.sql sqlExecute.groovy

Be careful when using the script options to always put double-quotes around the statement and the separator char to make
sure it doesn't get interpreted wrong.

A script in detail
------------------

Here is the source code for the checkJCRLanguageIntegrity.groovy Groovy script, provided as an example of the power
offered by the tool. It uses a helper class called JackrabbitHelper that makes it easy to retrieve configuration and
persistence manager instances.

    package scripts

    import org.apache.jackrabbit.core.id.NodeId
    import org.apache.jackrabbit.core.persistence.IterablePersistenceManager
    import org.apache.jackrabbit.core.state.NodeState
    import org.jahia.server.tools.scriptrunner.engines.jahia66.JackrabbitHelper
    import org.slf4j.Logger
    import org.slf4j.LoggerFactory

    Logger logger = LoggerFactory.getLogger("checkJCRLanguageIntegrity.groovy");

    JackrabbitHelper jackrabbitHelper = new JackrabbitHelper(scriptRunnerConfiguration);

    logger.info("Checking default workspace bundles...");

    IterablePersistenceManager defaultPM = (IterablePersistenceManager) jackrabbitHelper.getWorkspacePM("default");
    checkLanguageIntegrity(defaultPM, jackrabbitHelper, logger);

    logger.info("Checking live workspace bundles...");
    IterablePersistenceManager livePM = (IterablePersistenceManager) jackrabbitHelper.getWorkspacePM("live");
    checkLanguageIntegrity(livePM, jackrabbitHelper, logger);

    logger.info("Checking versioning bundles...");
    IterablePersistenceManager versioningPM = (IterablePersistenceManager) jackrabbitHelper.getVersioningPM();
    checkLanguageIntegrity(versioningPM, jackrabbitHelper, logger);

    private void checkLanguageIntegrity(IterablePersistenceManager iterablePersistenceManager, JackrabbitHelper jackrabbitHelper, Logger logger) {
        Iterable<NodeId> allNodeIds = iterablePersistenceManager.getAllNodeIds(null, 0);
        Iterator<NodeId> allNodeIdIterator = allNodeIds.iterator();
        int count = 0;
        while (allNodeIdIterator.hasNext()) {
            NodeId nodeId = allNodeIdIterator.next();
            NodeState nodeState = iterablePersistenceManager.load(nodeId);
            if (jackrabbitHelper.isNodeType(nodeState, "http://www.jcp.org/jcr/mix/1.0", "language")) {
                if (!jackrabbitHelper.hasProperty(nodeState, "http://www.jcp.org/jcr/1.0", "language")) {
                    logger.warn("Node " + nodeState.getId() + " is of type mix:language but is missing a jcr:language property !");
                }
            }
            count++;
        }
        logger.info("Loaded " + count + " node states");
    }
